As the energy infrastructure of smart cities, smart grid upgrades traditional power grid systems with state-of-the-art information and communication technologies. In particular, as the full deployment of the Internet of Things in the power grid (a.k.a. power Internet of Things or PIoT), the newly introduced information flow together with inherent energy flow makes it more efficient for power generation, transmission, distribution, and consumption. To further exploit the precious energy and the latest 5G technologies, this article boosts to add a value flow in the smart grid, mainly including the value created by innovative services and market mechanisms and the value added by the information flow. Specifically, by integrating PIoT with cyber-physical systems, this article sketches a conceptual framework of the cyber-physical power system (CPPS). The CPPS carries out holistic perception and ubiquitous connection of distributed energy sources and electrical facilities and builds up a smarter power grid with global information interaction, intelligent decision-making, and real-time agile control. Finally, for illustration purposes, we conduct a case study regarding an intelligent home management system.

1 Introduction
By integrating state-of-the-art information and communication technologies (ICTs) with legacy urban infrastructure facilities, it is envisaged that future cities will evolve into huge cyber-physical systems and finally a digital-physical twinning world. To this end, a smart grid is of the first and foremost importance. For instance, in the Texas power crisis that occurred in February 2021, the United States, a massive electricity generation failure in the state of Texas resulted in shortages of water, food, and heat, yielding more than 4.5 million homes and businesses being left without electricity in severe winter storms (Campbell, 2021).

According to the definition made by the American Electric Power Research Institute in 2011, a smart grid is an electricity network enabling a two-way flow of electricity and information (EPRI, 2011). Unlike traditional electric power grids with only a one-way electricity flow, the smart grid allows a two-way electricity flow between power grids and electricity customers. More importantly, integrating ICTs into power grids yields a novel two-way information flow and enables grids to have self-healing capabilities and electricity customers to become active participants.
2.1 Perception Layer: Sensing and Measurement
The sensing and measurement facilities and devices in the smart grid include intelligent metering equipment, phasor measurement units (PMUs), various sensors, etc. They compose the perception layer and play a critical role in data collection. Sensing and measurement devices are deployed in the whole area of the power grid to realize the digitalization and visualization through the ubiquitous information network. Through smart meters, PMUs, and various sensing devices, the physical grid is intensively perceived in time and space and can be easily mapped into a digital logical grid.

2.1.1 Smart Meter–Based Advanced Metering Infrastructure
A smart meter is a kind of equipment that fundamentally changes the operation of power grid and promotes the intellectualization of a power grid. Smart meters enable two-way information flow and energy flow between the customer and supplier. In addition to performing the function of metering, smart meters can act as intelligent sensing devices and actuator in distribution network, participating in the distribution and management of energy (Alahakoon and Yu, 2016).

Advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) based on smart meters is the core infrastructure of the smart grid. AMI consists of three key components: smart meters, two-way communication links, and a data center for data aggregation, analysis, and processing. Smart meters collect the electric power data and transmit them to a data management system. After data analysis, the system makes decisions, such as billing, load forecasting, load management, and demand response. When customers deploy the distributed energy system, AMI allows customers to sell the excess electricity to the grid through the market. Hence, AMI can improve the quality of power supply and the service level by building a two-way interactive relationship of energy flow and information flow between public utilities and households.

With the increasing deployment of AMI, the amount of electric power data increases sharply such that the centralized architecture for AMI will not be sustainable. By contrast, the distributed architecture with an advanced computing technology such as edge and fog computing will provide more powerful performance (Olivares-Rojas et al., 2020). In the 5G and IoT era, the advanced distributed architecture, the ICT, and the security mechanism are the key to the intelligent functionality of AMI.

2.1.2 PMU-Based Wide-Area Measurement System
PMUs play a more important role in wide-area measurement systems and state estimation in transmission network. PMUs support synchronous data collection and calculation. They connect with multiple substations and upload data in real time, which are used for dynamic monitoring and management, system prediction, and protection of smart grid.

A wide-area measurement system has four key components: PMUs, phasor data concentrator (PDC), applications, and information network among PMUs and PDC. A PMU obtains synchronous measurement and transmits data to the PDC through the information network. The decision-making and control center make the corresponding predictive correction and protection measures based on these data and send the feedback signal for self-control. Compared to situational awareness of supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA), the advanced PMU has a higher update frequency that can adapt to the highly dynamic operations of the smart grid (Gore and Valsan, 2018). Using PMUs for distributed state estimation benefits lower cost of data communication, sufficient redundancy and stability, and higher accuracy and efficiency. However, a distributed PMU network is vulnerable to hackers. And malicious manipulation of PMU data causes damage to power transmission and distribution, regardless of potential voltage instability or out of phase. Therefore, it is necessary to fully consider the information security of the PMU and evaluate the impact of distributed state estimation on a power grid (Cosovic et al., 2017).

2.1.3 Wireless Sensor Network
Considering the diversification and the explosive growth of electric power data and high demand for real-time interaction, the low scalability, low flexibility, and relatively high deployment cost of wired networks restrict the development of the smart grid, which promotes the application of wireless sensor networks. Sensor nodes in wireless sensor networks are responsible for measurement, data processing, storage, and communication. And they transmit information to sink nodes in a multi-hop way. Sink nodes have powerful computing and communication capabilities, and they connect to the management center. The management center makes decisions according to the acquired information of sensor networks. Wireless sensor networks are capable of self-organization, self-healing, adaptivity, and multi-hopping. They enhance the reliability of the power grid information network by allowing better monitoring of the system components, implement coordinated protection, and avoid and reduce the power grid fault (Chhaya et al., 2017).

The wireless sensor network plays a critical role in many fields of the smart grid, such as wireless automatic meter reading, remote system monitoring, and equipment fault diagnosis. However, wireless sensor networks are inherently limited to battery life, processing capability, and cache capacity. Therefore, it is imperative to ensure the performance of sensor nodes and extend the network life span under strictly resource-constrained conditions (Ogbodo et al., 2017).

2.2 Network Layer: Communication Technologies in a Smart Grid
To facilitate the interconnection and intercommunication of grid components, one must adopt an open and plug-and-play communication network architecture. It is also necessary to use universal standards and protocols to enable seamless communication among various devices. The network layer of PIoT has a ubiquitous communication capability around the clock and realizes the holographic perception of the power grid. To choose the most suitable communication technology and infrastructure for the smart grid, four key factors to be considered in practice consist of deployment duration, operation and management costs, communication performance, and environmental factors. In the following, the pros and cons of six typical communication technologies widely applied to the smart grid are sketched, including four wireless technologies and two wired technologies.

2.2.1 ZigBee
ZigBee is a low-power wireless communication technology based on the physical layer and medium access control layer of the IEEE 802.15.4 standard developed by the ZigBee Alliance (LAN/MAN Standards Committee, 2003). ZigBee is devoted for wireless devices that require a low data rate and ultralow power consumption. It is mainly applied in the fields of industrial control, home automation, building automation, energy management, personal health care, and consumer electronics.

The mesh topology of the ZigBee network is capable of self-healing and route repair. These features provide scalability, stability, and tolerance to node and link failures. These powerful network characteristics, as well as high anti-interference performance, have promoted the application of ZigBee in distribution network measurement, monitoring, and home energy management. For instance, integrating ZigBee-based smart devices with machine learning benefits intelligent home control with high robustness, stability, and efficiency for home’s energy control and management (Zhang et al., 2019).

2.2.2 WLAN
Wireless local area network (WLAN) can provide high data rate communication with low latency, and perform point-to-point and point-to-multipoint communication within a limited coverage area such as home area network (HAN). In WLAN, Wi-Fi, a wireless network protocol based on the IEEE 802.11 standards, is widely used for local area networking of devices and Internet access.